feat(ai-gateway): Add how-to for proxying Claude (#3509)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_how-tos/use-claude-code-with-ai-gateway-openai.md

---
title: Route Claude CLI traffic through Kong AI Gateway and OpenAI
content_type: how_to

related_resources:
  - text: AI Gateway
    url: /ai-gateway/
  - text: AI Proxy
    url: /plugins/ai-proxy/
  - text: File Log
    url: /plugins/file-log/

description: Configure AI Gateway to proxy Claude CLI traffic using OpenAI models

products:
  - gateway
  - ai-gateway

works_on:
  - on-prem
  - konnect

min_version:
  gateway: '3.13'

plugins:
  - ai-proxy-advanced
  - file-log

entities:
  - service
  - route
  - plugin

tags:
  - ai
  - openai

tldr:
  q: How do I run Claude CLI through Kong AI Gateway?

>   a: Install Claude CLI, configure its API key helper, create a Gateway Service and Route, attach the AI Proxy plugin to forward requests to Claude, enable file-log to inspect traffic, and point Claude CLI to the local proxy endpoint so all LLM requests pass through the AI Gateway for monitoring and control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a: Install Claude CLI, configure its API key helper, create a Gateway Service and Route, attach the AI Proxy plugin to forward requests to Claude, enable the File Log plugin to inspect traffic, and point Claude CLI to the local proxy endpoint so all LLM requests pass through the AI Gateway for monitoring and control.
```

            nano ~/.claude/settings.json
            ```

            Put this exact content in the file:

            ```json
            {
              "apiKeyHelper": "~/.claude/anthropic_key.sh"
            }
            ```

        3. Create the API key helper script:

            ```sh
            nano ~/.claude/anthropic_key.sh
            ```

            Inside, put a dummy API key:

            ```sh
            echo "x"
            ```

        4. Make the script executable:

            ```sh
            chmod +x ~/.claude/anthropic_key.sh
            ```

        5. Verify it works by running the script:

            ```sh
            ~/.claude/anthropic_key.sh
            ```

            You should see only your API key printed.
  entities:
    services:
      - example-service
    routes:
      - example-route

cleanup:
  inline:
    - title: Clean up Konnect environment
      include_content: cleanup/platform/konnect
      icon_url: /assets/icons/gateway.svg
    - title: Destroy the {{site.base_gateway}} container
      include_content: cleanup/products/gateway
      icon_url: /assets/icons/gateway.svg
---

## Configure the AI Proxy plugin

> First, configure the AI Proxy plugin for the [OpenAI provider](/ai-gateway/ai-providers/#openai). This setup uses the default `llm/v1/chat` route. Claude Code sends its requests to this route. The configuration also raises the maximum request body size to 512 KB to support larger prompts. You do not pass the API key here. The client-side steps store and supply it through the [helper script](/how-to/use-claude-code-with-ai-gateway/#claude-code-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, configure the AI Proxy plugin for the [OpenAI provider](/ai-gateway/ai-providers/#openai):
 * This setup uses the default `llm/v1/chat` route. Claude Code sends its requests to this route. 
 * The configuration also raises the maximum request body size to 512 KB to support larger prompts. 
 * You don't pass the API key here. The client-side prerequisite steps store and supply it through the [helper script](#claude-code-cli).
```

> The `llm_format: anthropic` parameter tells Kong AI Gateway to expect request and response payloads that match Claude's native API format. Without this setting, the gateway would default to OpenAI's format, which would cause request failures when Claude Code communicates with the OpenAI endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `llm_format: anthropic` parameter tells Kong AI Gateway to expect request and response payloads that match Claude's native API format. Without this setting, the Gateway would default to OpenAI's format, which would cause request failures when Claude Code communicates with the OpenAI endpoint.
```

{% entity_examples %}
entities:
  plugins:
    - name: ai-proxy
      config:
        llm_format: anthropic
        route_type: llm/v1/chat
        auth:
          header_name: Authorization
          header_value: Bearer ${openai_key}
          allow_override: false
        model:
          provider: openai
          name: gpt-5-mini
        max_request_body_size: 524288
variables:
  openai_key:
    value: "$OPENAI_API_KEY"
{% endentity_examples %}

## Configure the File Log plugin

> Now, let's enable the [File Log](/plugins/file-log/) plugin on the service, to inspect the LLM traffic between Claude and the AI Gateway. This creates a local `claude.json` file on your machine. The file records each request and response so you can review what Claude sends through the AI Gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's enable the [File Log](/plugins/file-log/) plugin on the Service, to inspect the LLM traffic between Claude and the AI Gateway. This creates a local `claude.json` file on your machine. The file records each request and response so you can review what Claude sends through the AI Gateway.
```

{% entity_examples %}
entities:
  plugins:
    - name: file-log
      config:
        path: "/tmp/claude.json"
{% endentity_examples %}

## Verify traffic through Kong

Now, we can start a Claude Code session that points it to the local AI Gateway endpoint:

```sh
ANTHROPIC_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000/anything \
ANTHROPIC_MODEL=gpt-5-mini \
claude
```

Claude Code asks for permission before it runs tools or interacts with files:

```text
I'll need permission to work with your files.

This means I can:
- Read any file in this folder
- Create, edit, or delete files
- Run commands (like npm, git, tests, ls, rm)
- Use tools defined in .mcp.json

Learn more ( https://docs.claude.com/s/claude-code-security )

❯ 1. Yes, continue
2. No, exit
```
{:.no-copy-code}

Select **Yes, continue**. The session starts. Ask a simple question to confirm that requests reach Kong AI Gateway.

```text
Tell me about Procopius' Secret History.
```

> Claude Code might prompt you approve its web search for answering the question. When you select **Yes** Claude will produce a full-length response to your request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Claude Code might prompt you approve its web search for answering the question. When you select **Yes**, Claude will produce a full-length response to your request:
```
